## Database Systems - Overview
### _Homework_

**1.  What database models do you know?**
   * Hierarchial (tree) model
   * Network/graph model
   * Relational(table) model
   * Object-orientated
**1.  Which are the main functions performed by a Relational Database Management System (RDBMS)**

	 RBDMS manage date stored in tables
      * Creating, altering, deleting tables and relationship between them
      * Adding, changing, deleting, searching and retreving of data stored in tables
      * Support for SQL language
      * Transaction managment(optional)
1.  Define what is "table" in database terms.

	 Database tables consist data, arrange in rows and columns. 
   * All rows have same structure. 
   * Columns have name and type (string, number, date, inmage or other) 
   
   	The schema of a table is an ordered sequence of column spacifications - name and type.
1.  Explain the difference between a primary and a foreign key.

    *  Primary key is a column of the table that uniquely identifies its rows, and the foreign key is an identifier of a record located in another table- foreign key refers to primary key, it is used to link tow tables together.
   *  The row has only one primary key, but it can have many foreign keys
   *  Tow or more different rows in a table can have same foreign key, but never same primary key
   *  Foreign key allows "Null values", but primary not.
1.  Explain the different kinds of relationships between tables in relational databases.

  
	* One-to many - A single record in the first table has many  coresponding records in the second table
	* Many -to many - many record in a table coresponds to a single records in the other table - shows inheritance between tables. Implemented throgh additional table
	* One-to -one -  A single record in the first table has many  coresponding records in the second table
1.  When is a certain database schema normalized?

	Database schema is normalized when it doesn't contain repeating data.
  * What are the advantages of normalized databases?
	  * Smaller database - by eliminating duplicate data, you will be able to reduce the overall size of the database.
      * Better performance:
        	+ Narrow tables: Having more fine-tuned tables allows your tables to have less columns and allows you to fit more records per data page
        	+ Fewer indexes per table mean faster maintenance tasks such as index rebuilds
        	+ Only join tables that you need 


1.  What are database integrity constraints and when are they used?

	They inforce data rules which cannot be violated  and they enshure data integrity in the database tables.


1.  Point out the pros and cons of using indexes in a database.

	__PROS__
	* speed up searching of values in a certain column or group of columns
	
	__CONS__
	* Adding and deleting records in indexed tables is slower
				
1.  What's the main purpose of the SQL language?

	The main purpose is manipulation of relational databases
	SQL language supports:
	* Creating, altering, deleting tables and other objects in the database
	* Searching, retrieving, inserting, modifying and deleting table data (rows)
1.  What are transactions used for?
Transactios are used for executing a database operation as a silgle unit(like lock in C#). 

	Transactions guarantee the consistency and the integrity of the database. 
	
	Either all of then are execute successfully or none of them is executed at all.

  * Give an example.

	Bank operations like deposit, withdrow, banktransfer. If two  users want to acces same account at same time, while first user is operating, the second is waiting.
1.  What is a NoSQL database?

	NoSQL date base use document-based model. It is non-relational. Data are stored as documents.Documents do not have a fixed structure. NoSQL databases support CRUD (create, read, update,delite), indexing, query, concurrency and transactions. Single entity (document) is a single record. 


1.  Explain the classical non-relational data models.


 	There are four general types of NoSQL databases, each with their own specific attributes:
	+ **Key-Value store** –The least complex NoSQL datebases. They are designed for storing data in a schema-less way. In a key-value store, all of the data within consists of an indexed key and a value, hence the name. Examples of this type of database include: Cassandra, Redis, DyanmoDB, Azure Table Storage (ATS), Riak, BerkeleyDB.
	+ **Column store** – (also known as wide-column stores) instead of storing data in rows, these databases are designed for storing data tables as sections of columns of data, rather than as rows of data. While this simple description sounds like the inverse of a standard database, wide-column stores offer very high performance and a highly scalable architecture. Examples include: HBase, BigTable and HyperTable.
	+ **Document database** – expands on the basic idea of key-value stores where “documents” are more complex, in that they contain data and each document is assigned a unique key, which is used to retrieve the document. These are designed for storing, retrieving, and managing document-oriented information, also known as semi-structured data. Examples include: MongoDB and CouchDB.
	+ **Graph database** – Based on graph theory, these databases are designed for data whose relations are well represented as a graph and has elements which are interconnected, with an undetermined number of relations between them. Examples include: Neo4J and Polyglot.

	#### The following table lays out some of the key attributes that should be considered when evaluating NoSQL databases.

	Datamodel       | Performance | Scalability     | Flexibility | Complexity | Functionality
	----------------|-------------|-----------------|-------------|------------|-----------------
	Key-value store | High        | High            | High        | None       | Variable (None)
	Column Store    | High        | High            | Moderate    | Low        | Minimal
	Document Store  | High        | Variable (High) | High        | Low        | Variable (Low)
	Graph Database  | Variable    | Variable        | High        | High       | Graph Theory
	 
1.  Give few examples of NoSQL databases and their pros and cons.


##### Redis
Ultra-fast in-memory data structures server

Advantages                                       | Disadvantages
-------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------
Lightening fast. | Memory only.
Replication possible. | You can have slaves, but it's not distributed yet. Although they intend to add it in future.
Cool datastructures available within realm of key-value. | 

##### MongoDB
Mature and powerful JSON-document database

Advantages                                       | Disadvantages
-------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------
Enables horizontal scalability by using a technique called sharding. | Very unreliable. No single server durability.
Provides ACID properties at the document level as in the case of relational databases. | Indexes take up a lot of RAM. They are B-tree indexes and if you have many, you can run out of system resources really fast.


##### CouchDB
JSON-based document database with REST API

Advantages                                       | Disadvantages
-------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------
Very persistent, no power failure, system crash will do anything to your data. | Couch maintains a different document for every update you make.
Everything is HTTP. You can serve a CouchApp from database itself using views. | 
Replication is easy, and can be uni or bi-directional. | 

##### Cassandra
Distributed wide-column database

Some of the strong points of Cassandra are:
* Highly scalable and highly available with no single point of failure.
* Very high write throughput and good read throughput. 
* Flexible schemal. 
	
